---
title: 'GSoC 2019 for mentors: Summertime Codeness'
author: Kowainik
tags: haskell, gsoc
description: Our Google Summer of Code journey as mentors for Issue Wanted project
useShortName: yes
---

It is autumn outside, which means that it is time to summarise what we
accomplished during this summertime. For Kowainik this summer was special,
primarily due to the fact that our team members
[Dmitrii Kovanikov](https://kodimensional.dev/) and
[Veronika Romashkina](https://vrom911.github.io/) volunteered to be mentors in
[Google Summer of Code 2019](https://summerofcode.withgoogle.com/). We are proud
to say that we were involved in the ["Issue Wanted"](@github(kowainik):issue-wanted)
project where [Rashad Gover](https://rashadg1030.github.io) was developing
production-level Haskell web-application under our supervision. We are going to
tell more about the project itself further, but wow! What a whirlwind of amazing
contributions and discoveries it was for all of us! And it flashed in a blink of
an eye.

This blog post is our experience summary of mentoring for the first time in
Google Summer of Code. Here we want not only to share how it feels to be a
mentor but also to try motivating you to become a part of this global community
event in the future. We're going to show some insights into all the processes
and retrospect on that amazing period of our lives. This write-up is different
in a way that it describes events from the mentors' perspective, so we hope it
could be useful for both potential mentors and students.

## What is Google Summer of Code?

For those who are not familiar with this huge student programming event of the
summer, Google Summer of Code (further shortly GSoC) is an international
three-month-long programme that aims to help students join the marvellous open
source world. The programme provides volunteer mentorship from representatives
of all kinds of organizations in so many different areas: from programming
language compilers and database frameworks, to operating systems and graphics
engines.

Here is the official quote from Google about GSoC:

> Google Summer of Code is the global programme that matches students up with
> open source, free software and technology-related organizations to write code
> and get paid to do it! The organizations provide mentors who act as guides
> through the entire process, from learning about the community to contributing
> code. The idea is to get students involved in and familiar with the open
> source community and help them to put their summer break to good use.


More information about the project, guidelines and rules can be found at the
linked page:

* [Google Summer of Code guides: What is Google Summer of Code?](https://google.github.io/gsocguides/student/)

[Haskell.org](https://www.haskell.org/) is the organization that represents
Haskell — an advanced, lazy, purely functional programming language. It is also
a regular participant of GSoC. [Summer of Haskell](https://summer.haskell.org/)
has already demonstrated
[outstanding results previously](https://summer.haskell.org/news/2018-09-01-final-results.html).
Haskell got a lot of attention from students due to a number of interesting
projects to work on, so the organization continues to take part in the
programme.

Taking part in such occasion was a natural decision for us personally since
Haskell mentorship is one of the things we do at Kowainik, and we think we are
well-prepared in our mission to help the Haskell community.

## Proposal lifecycle

Let's now talk about how to get into the GSoC programme and break down the
process into small steps from the mentors' side.

### Idea

> It all started with the idea.

In Kowainik we strive to improve the Haskell ecosystem, and the project we were
applying for GSoC is very in line with this goal. We decided that giving
students an opportunity to work on the production-level application with modern
Haskell idioms is a worthwhile contribution to the language. Especially when the
idea itself, when implemented, should help other beginners with OSS
contributing.

Fortunately, we had a concept for a web application that helps to improve the
contributing experience in the Haskell world —
[issue-wanted](@github(kowainik)). We were excited by this idea when we came up
with it, but we didn't have enough time to work on the implementation. So we
decided that giving an opportunity to develop a Haskell web application from
scratch using modern best-practices would be awesome practice for students as
part of the GSoC programme.

The intention behind `issue-wanted` is to provide web service for contributors
where they can search repositories for the issues they can grab and work on.
This is especially useful for beginners because they can learn something new
while contributing to the open source projects, and improve the quality of the
libraries we all love. Everybody wins!

### Project proposal

First, we had to submit our proposal to Haskell.org. To do so, one should send a
pull request to the [haskell-org/summer-of-haskell](@github) repository. This PR
should include a single markdown file to be added to the `content/ideas` folder.
The text could be in the free format but should include some important
information: difficulty, requirements and potential mentors. You can see our
proposal as the reference:

* [HSoC 2019: Issue-Wanted proposal](https://github.com/haskell-org/summer-of-haskell/blob/a8f7b9bafce8e4ad8256a8b207fc68c834688cdc/content/ideas/issue-wanted.md)

We proposed our own project idea for Summer of Haskell, but it is possible to
join as a mentor to an already existing project idea or the idea submitted by
the student in the proposal. To do so, you can write an email to
[Summer of Haskell organizing committee](https://summer.haskell.org/contact.html).

If you don't have enough time or experience to be a mentor you still can
participate in this process. If you know a library, tool or any project which
would need some extra help with some particular tasks, you can submit the issue
to the mentioned repository. There is a possibility that somebody could be
interested in writing a proposal for this idea, or there could even be a mentor
who is ready to take care of this idea.

But this is not the only way you can help at this stage of the programme. You
can look through the submitted PRs with project ideas and show your support by
commenting on the PR or even just adding a 👍 reaction to it. It could help the
committee to make the right decision on which proposals to accept.

The organization decides whether the idea satisfies the criteria for GSoC. Once
all ideas are collected, it is time for the organization to submit the
application to GSoC. Only after that, Google decides whether the organization
qualifies for participating. After accepted organizations are announced,
students can start looking for the proposals they would like to work on and
contact potential mentors in advance and ask various questions about their
projects.

### Students' Applications

The next stage is the student application period. Students submit drafts of
their proposals to the projects that they are interested to work at during the
three summer months. And now mentors look at all proposals for their projects
and decide which students to accept. Only a single student can work on one
project idea.


It was quite surprising for us to receive more than 20 (!) proposals for the
project. After being stunned by such huge amount of submissions, we had to solve
an extremely difficult task: choose only one student for the project… This task
was especially difficult because all proposals were strong and unique. And it
was obvious that students spent many days researching the project and writing
their proposals, which only made the choice tougher. As a consequence, we also
spent many days selecting the only person for the project. And if any of the
students who applied for `issue-wanted` are reading this, we want to say that
you are awesome! The work all of you have done during the application period is
outstanding 👏

When we were evaluating all submitted proposals to our idea, we looked at the
multiple criteria, including:

* __Quality of the proposal__: how well the student understands the project, how
  they see the development process. So, students, _spend more time on your
  proposal_. It's very important!
* __Skills__: we had some minimal knowledge requirements in our proposal, such
  as basic Haskell knowledge. So, mentors, please write the requirements
  clearly. And students, _show how you satisfy the requirements in the
  applications_.
* __Open source profile__: if the link to a GitHub (or similar) profile is
  provided — this is a plus. If a student had some projects, they could give us
  an idea of what to expect from them. We could see the real examples of their
  code, get familiar with their style of project management, and also observe
  their records of previous open source contributions. Also, our project is
  hosted on GitHub, so if a person has an open source image, it means that they
  are comfortable enough with `git`. Our advice is to _keep your OSS portfolio
  up-to-date_.
* __Early communications__: some students approached us before the start of the
  draft submission. Some of them were asking about the project, others wanted to
  see if their vision of the project is getting along with what we expect. They
  asked questions, and we shared recommended tutorials for students to read
  before starting working on the project. So the advice is to _keep in touch
  with mentors, ask for the resources and make sure that your understanding of
  the project is correct_.
* __Eager to learn__: when working on such a big application, you should be
  ready to face new concepts and technologies, and also unexpected challenges.
  If you're not afraid and willing to learn, you can overcome such difficulties.


[Rashad Gover](https://rashadg1030.github.io/rashad-blog/) showed himself superb
during this evaluation, so we are extremely happy that we had a chance to work
with him the whole summer! You can find his proposal among others in the list of
all accepted proposals for GSoC 2019:

* [Summer or Haskell: Dashboard](https://summerofcode.withgoogle.com/organizations/5556388114202624/)

> NOTE: Oh, also, don't open source your proposals before the acceptance period
> is over. Don't put any of your ideas of the project into open source repo as
> well! We didn't experience that but there were some incidents in other
> organizations, so watch out.


## Mentors responsibilities

Being a mentor is a tough work that requires special skills, time and patience.
Officially, the only required step from mentors is submitting monthly
evaluations. It takes 10-15 minutes to fill in, but it has a lot of impact on
the project’s final results. However, in practice, to successfully complete the
project, mentors have to devote 10-20 hours a week for the programme during the
whole summer. That time is allocated to various tasks. It includes scheduled
meetings to discuss the progress, overall review of the project status and
exchanging feedback on the work.

We dedicated a huge portion of our time to the very careful and detailed pull
request reviews, which purpose was not only to check implementation, but also to
help Rashad improve his skills and grow as a developer. We had a lot of
interesting conversations where we explained challenging topics and new concepts
as well.

Most of the work for the "issue-wanted" project was completed. A good thing
about working on this production-level project is that Rashad had the
opportunity to get involved in the Haskell OSS community by submitting issues,
feature requests and bug fixes when needed, which we encouraged him to do.

Another important point for us was to focus not only on technical skills, but
help with other aspects of the programming life. We tried to keep Rashad
motivated and interested in the problems he had to solve. We tried to be as
helpful as possible, but we also took precautions not to hold his hand too much.

From one side, we needed to provide recommendations regarding libraries used in
the project and follow the plan. But on the other hand, we tried to give Rashad
freedom to experiment with new libraries and approaches within the scope of the
project. If a student wants to freely choose something we never used, that would
mean that the responsibility of learning and understanding this new tool should
be shared, because decisions could affect deadlines and can affect the outcomes.
We all needed to stay positive and dig deeper, even if there were some problems
with the implementation. It's important not to give up, but to experiment more.
These are the tricky parts of mentorship, but they are also crucial to helping
students succeed.


### Workflow and tools

The first thing we did as a team was establishing a smooth workflow and what
tools we were all going to use. It is extremely important to have a clear
process and common understanding on how everything should work together.

__The tools__ we used:

* [Github](@github)
* [GitHub project kanban board](@github(kowainik):issue-wanted/projects/1) to
  manage the project and instantly check the progress
* [Google Calendar](https://calendar.google.com/calendar) for scheduling and
  [Google Hangouts](https://hangouts.google.com) for meetings
* [git](https://git-scm.com/) for VCS
* [hit](@github:kowainik/hit-on) to support our workflow
* [Circle CI](https://circleci.com/) for building and testing the code
  automatically on each PR

__The workflow__ includes:

1. Managing issues and pull requests with
   [GitHub project kanban board](https://github.com/kowainik/issue-wanted/projects/1).
2. Using [Kowainik git/GitHub workflow](https://github.com/kowainik/org#workflow)
   including creating issues and contributing to the project only via pull
   requests.
3. Each pull request is reviewed by mentors.
4. Having regular calls.

We believe that having this workflow helped us to achieve a lot.

### Wisdom

Undoubtedly, GSoC had a lot of influence on us and we learned a lot of things
the hard way. Here we have some advice to future mentors additionally to general
sanity:

* Plan the project better beforehand, student's timeline from the proposal is
  your friend
* Use good tools to manage the project and establish a preferred workflow
  upfront (discuss with the student what would work for them as well)
* Share your knowledge as much as you can (but do not impose opinions)
* Make sure you understand your idea well enough to be a mentor (it's not enough
  to know that a project can be done, you need to be skilled in this area to
  also be able to explain various topics and make various architecture
  decisions)
* Leave extra time on all kinds of emergencies and unpredictable events.
  Unfortunately, life is complicated, so make sure you and the student are be
  able to take some complete day-offs.

## Results

Even if we can't present a polished version of the deployed project, we achieved
a lot during GSoC and we would like to share our results.

1. Almost the whole backend part is finished, including a heavy set of tests.
   And believe us, there were some unexpected challenges and it wasn't just a
   walk on a sunny day.
2. Rashad wrote a series of several blog posts about his experience at GSoC. His
   posts cover the project architecture and modern design patterns in Haskell.
   We can confidently say that these posts are great guides to writing more
   advanced Haskell projects! Not to mention that there's a real-world open
   source project that uses all these techniques to solve daily problems. Check
   out Rashad's blog:
    * [GSoC 2019 - Building A Web Application with Haskell](https://rashadg1030.github.io/rashad-blog/6.html)
    * [Guide to Implementing Custom Monadic Effects in Issue-Wanted](https://rashadg1030.github.io/rashad-blog/7.html)
    * [GSoC 2019 - Final Evaluation](https://rashadg1030.github.io/rashad-blog/8.html)

3. Lots of Haskell libraries improvements are made. Working on a middle-size
   project and using a lot of various libraries really tests the strength of
   Haskell and its ecosystem. It's inevitable that something doesn't quite work
   as expected. So Rashad contributed upstream feature requests and reported
   issues when we had any.
4. We experimented with Haskell on the frontend. Unfortunately, our plans to go
   full-stack Haskell didn't work out, but the experience we got from trying
   means a lot to us.

## Benefits for mentors

Being a GSoC mentor is a challenging task, especially in the Haskell world. You
not only need to understand Haskell and its ecosystem well-enough to explain
various topics and recommend proper approaches, but being a mentor also requires
having strong soft skills. You need to solve various tasks like organizing the
workflow, establishing and managing proper communications (especially with time
zone differences), providing helpful code reviews, guiding a student in the
right direction and helping them to achieve their goals in the most productive
way. No surprise that we've spent a lot of free time solving organisational
issues, communicating, reviewing PRs and other problems. Sometimes it felt like
a second job. But we would like to give a shout out to Rashad for being an
awesome contributor! It was a pleasure to supervise him!

Although it was hard, the reward was worth it. We gained a lot of experience,
improved our mentoring and communication skills, helped a person grow and
motivated him to contribute to OSS and helped improve the Haskell ecosystem.
Also, this project is proof that it's possible to build production-level Haskell
applications using some advanced language concepts, in a relatively short period
of time, without being an expert in the language.

Kowainik is a small, passionate non-profit organization. But if you're a big
commercial company, you can use GSoC as an excellent opportunity to both help
open source and also train new people for your projects!

## Conclusion

Google Summer of Code is an excellent opportunity for students to contribute to
OSS, learn new things and improve the world! But as you can see, mentors get a
lot of benefits from participating in this movement too. We hope this overview
of our journey can motivate you to join GSoC next year, no matter your status:
organization, individual mentor or student. Haskell doesn't have the biggest
community but we all managed to create such an interesting experience. Maybe you
can leverage this programme for your organization too!

Finally, we want to express our gratitude to all the organizers, organizations,
mentors and students taking part in this. It warms our hearts to see so many
passionate engineers working on great projects and making the world a better
place ❤️
